 A HISTORY OF NIGERIA

TOYIN FALOLA AND MATTHEW M. HEATON
           University of Texas at Austin
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo

Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521862943

© Toyin Falola and Matthew M. Heaton 2008


This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published in print format 2008


ISBN-13 978-0-511-39712-7            eBook (NetLibrary)

ISBN-13 978-0-521-86294-3            hardback

ISBN-13 978-0-521-68157-5            paperback



Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
                            Contents




List of illustrations                                     page ix
List of maps                                                   xi
Acknowledgments                                               xii
Chronology                                                   xiii
Notable people in Nigerian history                            xix
List of abbreviations                                      xxxiii
Glossary                                                   xxxvi

Introduction                                                    1
 1 Early states and societies, 9000 BCE – 1500 CE             16
 2 Slavery, state, and society, c. 1500 – c. 1800             39
 3 Political and economic transformations in the
   nineteenth century                                         61
 4 Transition to British colonial rule, 1850 – 1903           85
 5 Colonial society to 1929                                   110
 6 Nationalist movements and independence, 1929 – 1960       136
 7 Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                     158
 8 Oil, state, and society, 1970 – 1983                       181
 9 Civil society and democratic transition, 1984 – 2007      209
10 Nigeria and Nigerians in world history                    243




                                 vii
viii                           Contents

   Concluding remarks: corruption, anti-corruption,
   and the 2007 elections                             271

   Notes                                              280
   Selected bibliography                              305
   Index                                              322
                              chapter 7

          Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970




                            introduction
When Nigeria achieved independence from British colonial rule on
October 1, 1960, the prospects appeared promising and expectations for
the future of the country were high. Nigeria was the most populous
country in Africa, and the potential for economic growth was great,
buoyed largely by the discovery of commercial quantities of petroleum in
the Niger delta region in 1958. Nigeria was dubbed the ‘‘Giant of Africa,’’
and many people both inside and outside the country believed that
Nigeria would soon rise to claim a leading position in African and world
affairs. Nigeria also saw itself as a beacon of hope and progress for other
colonized peoples emerging from the yoke of alien rule. By 1970, how-
ever, Nigeria’s stability and prestige had been greatly damaged by a
decade of political corruption, economic underdevelopment, and military
coups. Most damaging, however, was the culmination of these problems
in a two-and-a-half-year civil war from 1967 to 1970 that rent the country
along regional and ethnic lines, killed between 1 and 3 million people, and
nearly destroyed the fragile federal bonds that held together the Nigerian
state.
   The underlying cause of all the problems that Nigeria experienced in
the 1960s and has experienced since then is what is often called the
‘‘national question.’’1 What is Nigeria? Who are Nigerians? How does a
country go about developing a meaningful national identity? The geo-
graphical area now known as Nigeria was created by the British colonial
administration in 1914, not by indigenous peoples themselves. Thereafter,
the people within the borders of Nigeria were known to the world as
‘‘Nigerians,’’ but in reality this designation meant little to most people,
whose lives continued to be primarily centered on local communities that
had existed for hundreds and thousands of years. The regional and federal
emphases of the constitutions of the 1950s further undermined the

                                    158
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970               159
development of a unified national consciousness by determining that
access to power at the national level was to be derived from holding
power at the regional level. The largest ethnic groups in each region – the
Hausa/Fulani, Yoruba, and Igbo in the Northern, Western, and Eastern
Regions respectively – therefore came to dominate their respective regions
and to contest for power at the federal level. Within each region, ethnic
minorities often opposed the political domination of the large ethnic
groups and, as a result, they felt increasingly alienated from the political
process, creating even further subdivisions of identity that detracted
from the development of a single, encompassing Nigerian national
identity. Since power derived most immediately from association on a
sub-national level, there seemed to be very little to gain in domestic
politics from identifying on a national level. As a result, when Nigeria
became an independent sovereign state in 1960, in many ways it was a
state without a nation.
   The problem of national unity was apparent in the early 1960s, and
Nigerians addressed it in many ways. Artists, scholars, and some politi-
cians went about trying to construct a unique Nigerian culture through
their art, writings, speeches, and legislation. Efforts were made to pro-
mote a strong central state and a state-run economy that focused on
development initiatives across Nigeria. All these efforts were meant to
bring Nigerians closer together politically, economically, and culturally,
to promote commonalities and downplay differences. Ultimately, how-
ever, these efforts failed, largely because of the overwhelming trend in the
political sphere towards consolidating power at the regional level at any
cost. Official corruption, rigged elections, ethnic baiting, bullying, and
thuggery dominated the conduct of politics in the First Republic, which
existed from 1960 to 1966.2
   The preponderance of such realpolitik tactics struck fear in the hearts
of many Nigerians. Since regional identities were strong and national
identity was weak, the greatest fear of most Nigerians in the 1960s was
that their region would become ‘‘dominated’’ by another. Southerners
from the Eastern and Western Regions feared northern domination, and
northerners feared southern domination. These fears led to severely
flawed elections in 1964 and 1965, in which all kinds of dirty tricks were
used by every side. Under these circumstances, many Nigerians came to
believe that the federal system was dysfunctional and that Nigeria should
cease to exist in its present form. These attitudes led directly to the
overthrow of the civilian democratic regime by several military officers in
January 1966, and, second, to a bloody civil war between 1967 and 1970,
160                         A History of Nigeria
in which the Eastern Region attempted to secede from Nigeria and
establish the sovereign state of Biafra. Eventually the federal government,
made up of the Northern and Western Regions and the Federal Capital
Territory of Lagos, was able to reincorporate the Eastern Region, but
overall the Nigerian Civil War did more to exemplify the problems
associated with the national question than to solve them.

                          building a nation
The need to build pride around a unified national identity for Nigeria
was not a new development in the 1960s; indeed, the creation of a pan-
Nigerian consciousness had been a preoccupation of nationalist activists
since at least the 1930s. By the 1960s, however, the desire for a sense of
national unity had spread beyond the political realm to encompass cul-
tural activities as well. Many people began searching for ways to develop a
distinct and recognizable national culture in order to bring Nigerians
together as a single people and to grow national pride by contributing
something distinctly Nigerian to world culture in general. Artists, writers,
scholars, and politicians developed many different conceptions of what
aesthetics and values best characterized Nigeria, but all were clearly
concerned with promoting and analyzing Nigeria’s unique traditions and
history, and in this way illustrated their desire to forge a stronger national
identity.
   In theater and literature, Nigerians made great contributions to
national culture. Chinua Achebe, perhaps Nigeria’s most famous author,
published his masterpiece, Things Fall Apart, in 1958.3 By the early 1960s
he had become one of the leading voices in the Nigerian arts. Written in
English prose, Things Fall Apart makes use of a European language and a
European medium, the novel, to tell a tale of life in Nigeria prior to and
leading up to British colonial rule. Other writers told similar tales of
Nigeria’s traditional ways, but in a different type of language. Amos
Tutuola’s The Palm-wine Drinkard,4 first published in 1952 and produced
in the theater in the 1960s, tells of the story of a man’s journey with a
palm-wine tapper (a worker in a traditional Nigerian industry) through
the land of the dead. Rich in indigenous cosmology, the tale is also
written in broken, or pidgin, English, common among Nigerians who did
not have extensive European education. Other writers wrote solely in
indigenous languages, but this severely restricted their markets and,
therefore, their capacity to truly promote a pan-Nigerian vision. The
most famous dramatist to emerge in the early 1960s was Wole Soyinka,
                  Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                161
whose A Dance of the Forests 5 was written to commemorate Nigerian
independence in 1960. His plays became famous not only in Nigeria but
throughout Africa and Europe. Soyinka’s contribution to drama later
earned him the distinction of becoming the first sub-Saharan African to
win the Nobel Prize in literature.
   Soyinka and other dramatists promoted national unity through their
work in several ways. First, many of the plays written and performed at
this time contained characters from many different ethnic groups in
Nigeria. Soyinka’s play The Swamp Dwellers,6 which contains characters
whose names clearly come from many different ethnicities, is a case in
point. Second, productions of plays were often undertaken by theater
groups in Nigerian colleges and universities. Because the universities were
few in number, their make-up was very multi-ethnic, as students came
from across Nigeria to earn degrees. As a result, the casts of university-
produced plays were multi-ethnic in nature, often with actors playing
characters of a different ethnic background from their own.7 Finally,
much of the literature of the period, including drama, was written in
English, which made the works accessible to a wider audience than if they
had been written in a locally specific indigenous language.
   The issue of language was a tricky one in the development of national
identity. On the one hand, English was clearly the language of the
colonial past, an alien language that had no roots in Nigeria’s cultures or
traditions. For this reason, many felt its use should be limited in an
independent Nigeria. At the same time, however, Nigeria itself was a
creation of the colonial past, and the shared colonial experience was one
of the major factors through which all Nigerians could relate to each
other regardless of their other differences. Indeed, the federal government
had declared English the national language of Nigeria in 1960 as one way
of downplaying regionalism and ethnic tensions in the legislative process.
Just as some people found English distasteful, others found it appropriate
and even indispensable. Tutuola, whose Palm-wine Drinkard was written
in pidgin English, received heavy criticism for this choice from other
Nigerian literati, who felt that the use of pidgin, despite its undeniable
authenticity, denigrated Nigerian intelligence and perpetuated the image
of the Nigerian as barbaric and uneducated.8
   One thing that all cultural activists could agree on, however, was that
Nigeria’s rich history and traditions were the foundation upon which
national consciousness could and should be built. Therefore, much of the
fictional writing of novelists and dramatists focused on Nigeria’s pre-
colonial past and incorporated distinctly indigenous symbolism. At the
162                        A History of Nigeria
same time, the academics who earned degrees either in Nigeria’s universities
or abroad themselves turned their focus on Nigeria’s pre-colonial past in
such fields as history, archaeology, and anthropology. No longer content
with Eurocentric interpretations of their history and traditions, Nigerian
scholars contributed their first-hand understanding of their own cultures to
the analysis of Nigeria’s past. They also sought out the indigenous voice by
incorporating oral histories into the documentary record, bringing balance
to knowledge bases that had previously been constructed solely from
European accounts of African affairs.9 Through such efforts, Nigerian
scholars began to rewrite Nigerian history in a way that fostered pride and
promoted the overarching similarities of experience shared by peoples in all
corners of Nigeria.
   In the visual arts, sculptors such as Uche Okeke, Susanne Wenger, and
Felix Idubor drew inspiration from the ancient sculptures found at Nok,
Osogbo, and other places, but were also influenced in form and style by
European production methods and aesthetics. Painters also sought to
express a distinctly Nigerian style using the inspiration of traditional
design motifs. Two main schools of artistic expression developed in the
1950s and 1960s: the Zaria School, based in the old Nigerian College of
Art and Sciences in Zaria; and the Osogbo School, an offshoot of the
Zaria School that emerged in Osogbo under the tutelage of Uli Beier and
Susanne Wenger.10
   Much of the brainstorming and labor associated with the flourishing
arts scene in Nigeria in the 1960s took place in colleges and universities.
Indeed, the school system became a key sector of Nigerian society in
which attempts were made to foster national culture and identity,
although the curricula and structure of schools continued to follow very
closely the British models developed during the colonial era. Overall,
access to formal education increased in the 1960s, and four new univer-
sities were opened between 1960 and 1962. These new universities con-
tributed to the national unity of Nigeria in two ways. First, in 1960 the
government established the Nigerian National University at Nsukka, in
the Eastern Region. Second, Ahmadu Bello University opened in Zaria,
in the Northern Region, in 1962, and the University of Lagos opened the
same year. As a result, each region now contained at least one university
(the Western Region claimed two universities from 1962, when the
University of Ife commenced classes), equalizing access and proximity to
higher education to a certain degree.11
   Despite these efforts to develop a distinct Nigerian culture and to
promote national unity through education and the arts, the national
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                163
question could not be solved so easily. Ethnic and regional tensions
heightened during the 1960s, culminating in civil war in 1967.

                      economic development
The expansion of formal education facilities was part of a wider economic
plan on the part of the First Republic to make Nigeria wealthier and more
self-sufficient. In 1962 the government introduced the First National
Development Plan (FNDP), designed to run until 1968, focusing on
investment in agriculture, industry, and education. The FNDP anticipated
an annual growth rate of 4 percent, with savings and investment both rising
to 15 percent of GNP annually. In many ways, the FNDP provisions were in
keeping with the previous development plans that had been in place since the
end of the Second World War. In some ways, however, the development
planning initiatives of the First Republic were more ambitious than previous
plans. First, whereas colonial development plans were overwhelmingly
interested in increasing agricultural output to boost the export economy, the
independent government of the 1960s was far more concerned with attaining
economic independence. Therefore, greater emphasis was placed on the
development of manufacturing and industry in the 1960s. In manufacturing,
tobacco, food processing, and beverages became the leading growth sectors.
Import substitution was also a main goal of manufacturing development.
Industrial development grew most in the mining sector, with petroleum
making up the bulk of the increase. Production of crude oil grew from
46,000 barrels per day (bpd) in 1961 to 600,000 bpd in 1967.12
    Through the FNDP and other development initiatives, the economy
grew at a steady rate between 1960 and 1966. The economy also diver-
sified considerably during this period. Agriculture, which had at its peak
constituted 63.4 percent of gross national product (GNP), fell to 55.6
percent of GNP by 1966. Manufacturing grew from 3.6 percent of GNP
in 1960 to 6.2 percent in 1966; mining rose from 0.9 percent of GNP in
1960 to 4.8 percent by 1966; and the distribution of goods increased from
9.1 percent to 14 percent in the same period. The economy as a whole was
improving slowly, with national incomes growing at an average rate of
5 percent between 1963 and 1966. Real per capita income grew from 48.1
naira (N) in 1960 to N53.8 in 1965, while overall GNP rose from N2,244.6
million in 1960 to N3,140.8 million in 1968. These kinds of data led many
to believe that Nigeria was on track to achieve economic independence.
The military coup of January 1966 and subsequent political developments
brought an unfortunately abrupt end to development planning efforts.
164                        A History of Nigeria
   It must be noted that the successes of the FNDP and other development
schemes were accompanied by many failures and negative trends. First,
although the economy was becoming more diversified, the decline in the
agricultural sector was not a good sign. As formal education opened up
opportunities for increasing numbers of rural Nigerians, agricultural fami-
lies were diverting revenues from investment in agriculture towards
sending their children to schools. Once educated, these children were less
likely to return home to work on the farms. This meant that, at the same
time that private investments in agriculture were declining, so too was the
agricultural labor force. Bad weather conditions in the 1960s further hurt
production and affected transportation. The growth rate of agriculture
was –0.5 percent in the 1960s, with the result that increasing amounts of
food had to be imported. Food imports reached N46.1 million in 1965
and continued to grow thereafter. The decline in agriculture boded ill for
Nigeria’s long-term economic independence.
   Further complicating Nigeria’s push for economic independence was the
anticipated reliance on foreign investment to fund development projects. In
order to encourage this investment, the government instituted tax breaks,
protective tariffs, and other incentives for investors. Foreign capital
investments were made in private enterprise, such as manufacturing and
industry; these investments, while increasing the overall productivity and
diversity of Nigeria’s economy, actually perpetuated the dependence of the
Nigerian economy on foreign sources, however. As of 1965, foreign private
investments accounted for 61 percent of all paid-up capital, compared to
figures of 27 percent for the Nigerian government and 12 percent for
Nigerian private investment. One hundred and ten firms in Nigeria were
fully owned by foreigners, with a paid-up capital value of N28 million,
compared to fifty-two Nigerian-owned companies, with a combined value
of N4 million. Further illustrating the continued economic dependence of
Nigeria on outside forces, the machinery and technology necessary for
manufacturing and industrial upgrades had to be bought entirely from
overseas producers. Foreign public investment, however, was harder to
come by. The FNDP called for 50 percent of the budgeted N2,366 million
to be raised through foreign investment. By the outbreak of civil war in
1967, however, foreign investment in the FNDP stood at only 14 percent.13

                  politics of the first republic
No doubt the main factor inhibiting foreign public investment was the
widespread political instability that characterized Nigeria’s First Republic.
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                 165
The federal system that had solidified regional divisions in the 1950s
devolved into utter dysfunction in the period from 1960 to 1966, as the
main political parties in each region fought bitterly and without scruples
to gain or maintain control of both the federal and regional assemblies,
which controlled the bulk of Nigerian resources, with the result that
control at the regional and federal level was the key to power over how
Nigeria’s resources would be distributed. Those parties that had control
over the assemblies were able to distribute government resources among
themselves and their supporters and, equally, were able to deny these
resources to their opponents. For instance, regional governments col-
lected import and export taxes, and controlled the produce marketing
boards, which consistently underpaid producers for their goods and, by
doing so, were able to maintain huge annual surpluses. Revenues from
these sources were then used to fund development projects. The parties
that controlled the regional and federal assemblies were therefore able to
determine where these projects would be undertaken, which ones would
be prioritized, who would get the contracts to complete the projects, and
so on. Control of the branches of government therefore had strong
implications for the future development of Nigeria.
   The fear that emerged in the 1960s was that of ‘‘domination.’’ South-
erners feared that an NPC-controlled government representing the interests
of the Northern Region would divert resources to the north, cut south-
erners out of their positions in the administration and the military, and
gradually Islamize the country. Northerners feared that southern ‘‘domi-
nation’’ by Awolowo’s Action Group and Azikiwe’s newly renamed
National Convention of Nigerian Citizens would allocate resources to the
more developed Western and Eastern Regions, which would prevent the
north from ever developing in a competitive way. They also feared that
southern ‘‘domination’’ would mean that southerners would come to
control the civil service and educational institutions of the north, since
northerners would continually be denied the resources to develop an
educated class to compete on merit with southerners. These fears of
‘‘domination’’ clouded any sense of national unity in Nigeria in the 1960s,
as residents in each region increasingly came to fear that other regions
intended to use the political system to enrich themselves at the expense of
their Nigerian ‘‘brothers’’ in other regions. Under such conditions, it
became imperative for parties once in power to stay in power and for those
out of power either to ally with the majority party or to wrest control of the
government away from that party in the next election, as opposition parties
faced the prospect of perennial marginalization.14
166                        A History of Nigeria
   These fears, while certainly exaggerated for political purposes, were not
unfounded. The NPC–NCNC coalition that governed at the federal level
from 1959 quickly became dominated by the NPC, which under the
leadership of federal Prime Minister Balewa and northern Premier
Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto, undertook many measures
specifically to improve the condition of the Northern Region and
northerners within the federation. The NPC-led government regularly
handed out appointments and promotions to underqualified northerners
at the expense of more qualified southerners in an effort to bring about
greater parity between the regions in the public service sector. For
example, from 1958 a quota system had determined admissions to the
military: 50 percent of military recruits were to come from the Northern
Region and 25 percent each from the Eastern and Western Regions.
Historically, a majority of the armed service enlistments had come from
the north (although 60 percent of northern recruits came from the non-
Muslim middle belt areas). Colonial policy had been to appoint officers
almost solely from among the more formally educated southern recruits,
however. The result at independence was an armed forces staffed pre-
dominantly by northerners but led predominantly by southerners, par-
ticularly by Igbos from the Eastern Region.15 In 1961 the NPC reversed
this trend by extending the quota system to officer recruitment. There-
after, 50 percent of all officers came from the Northern Region, regardless
of their relative qualifications vis-à-vis those of their southern compat-
riots.16 Policies such as these infuriated southerners, who saw their hard-
won skills disregarded by a federal system that increasingly seemed to value
ethnicity over merit.
   Further illustration of the NPC-led federal government’s intention to
use the federal apparatus to boost a northern agenda was to be seen in the
particulars of the FNDP. Although the FNDP claimed to be a national
development plan, in actuality the bulk of the allocations went to projects
in the north. Nearly all the funds earmarked for defense and a majority of
the funds for health, education, and roads went to projects in the north,
while the Niger dam project, estimated at £68.1 million but ultimately
costing over £88 million, accounted for over 10 percent of all federal
spending.17 The NPC could legitimately argue that in the spirit of
national unity the Northern Region should have the chance to catch up
with the south after suffering the deliberate underdevelopment that had
characterized the region during the colonial era. Southerners, however,
saw such policies as a slippery slope that they felt signified a long-term
plan for northern domination of the politics and economy of Nigeria.
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970               167
Furthermore, the emphasis on improving conditions for the north and
northerners strained relations with the NCNC, which increasingly felt
that it was not receiving benefits at the federal level commensurate with
its position as a coalition partner. From 1962 the NCNC leadership began
actively to court new allies against the NPC in the south and among
minority parties in the north.
   In the Western Region, the AG-dominated government faced a crisis in
1962 over its position as opposition party to the NPC–NCNC coalition.
Some members of the AG believed that the party and the region were
becoming irrelevant at the national level and would be better served by
abandoning their position as opposition party and allying more closely with
the NPC. By doing so, they felt, they would have greater access to federal
power and to the resources that the NPC doled out as the ruling party.
Among the adherents of this line of thought was Chief S. L. Akintola, who
had succeeded Chief Awolowo as Premier of the Western Region in 1959.
Awolowo was not in concert with this plan, however. Awolowo had
increasingly been arguing for what he called ‘‘democratic socialism,’’
declaring the need for the Western Region to nationalize industries and seek
every means of becoming self-sufficient as a region in order to reduce its
dependence on the federal government, thereby making the NPC irrelevant
in the west. In May 1962 a parliamentary crisis ensued when Awolowo
broke with Akintola and tried to have him removed as premier and replaced
by Awolowo’s ally, Chief Adegbenro. At this point Prime Minister Balewa,
who hoped to align with Akintola and gain a foothold in the Western
Region, declared a state of emergency, and suspended the AG government
for six months. At the end of the six months, Akintola was placed
back in the premiership under the auspices of a new party, the United
People’s Party, which formed a coalition government with the NCNC
in the Western Region. The AG was now a minority party in its own
stronghold.
   Things only became worse for the AG. The interim government
during the state of emergency brought Awolowo up on charges of cor-
ruption, and found him guilty of diverting regional funds in the amount
of over N5 million, which he was accused of using for political purposes
to strengthen the AG in the Western Region. Several other AG leaders,
including Chief Anthony Enahoro and Alhaji Lateef Jakande, were tried
for treasonable felonies and imprisoned along with Awolowo in 1962. The
AG was further weakened in 1963 when the Mid-Western Region was
carved out of the Western Region, creating a new political unit in
Nigerian politics and fracturing the AG base.
168                        A History of Nigeria
   By 1963 it had become clear to most minority parties in Nigeria that
there was little to be gained by joining with the NPC government. The
best way to gain power in the existing federal system was to attack the
northern basis of power by whatever means necessary. One opportunity
for the southern parties to erode northern political power was through the
census that was commissioned in 1962. The number of seats allocated to
each region in the federal House of Representatives and revenue-sharing
provisions at the federal level were based on regional population figures
from the 1953 census. Southern governments realized that, if they could
manipulate the census numbers in 1962, they could reverse the northern
population majority and gain more seats for the southern regions in the
federal assembly. When the census figures were released in May, they
indicated an incredible 70 percent increase in the population of the
Eastern and Western Regions since 1953, compared to a 30 percent
increase in the Northern Region. These figures were no doubt grossly
inaccurate, and the NPC-led government refused to ratify them, instead
ordering another census to be held the next year.
   When the results of the second census were released in November 1963,
the new figures indicated that the Northern Region had grown at a pace
commensurate with the East and West: some 8 million new northerners
had been discovered. Again, the results were widely regarded as fraudu-
lent. There were even reports that in some areas livestock had been
counted as people.18 The NCNC bitterly opposed the ratification of the
new census figures, but failed to prevent them becoming official. Akintola,
who was in the pocket of the NPC, accepted the figures on behalf of the
Western Region, while the newly formed Mid-Western Region’s premier,
Dennis Osadebey, accepted the figures ‘‘for the sake of national unity.’’19
The new Nigerian population officially stood at 55,620,268, of whom
29,758,875 resided in the Northern Region.20 These figures meant that the
proportional allocation of federal representation and revenues continued
to favor the Northern Region. The census crisis indicated to many
Nigerians, however, the extent to which governments in all regions were
willing to lie and cheat in pursuance of political power.
   What the census crisis revealed about the corruption of the First
Republic, the federal elections of 1964 only reinforced.21 Having lost the
fight to gain control through a realignment of the seat allocations in the
federal assembly, the southern-based political parties now turned all their
energies towards winning the upcoming elections. The NCNC and AG
united with minority parties in the Northern Region, such as Aminu
Kano’s NEPU and Joseph Tarka’s United Middle Belt Congress, to form
                  Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970               169
the United Progressive Grand Alliance (UPGA). The main goals of the
UPGA were the ousting of the NPC from control of the federal gov-
ernment and the reinstatement of AG supremacy in the Western Region,
and deposing the highly unpopular regime of Premier Akintola and his
newly formed Nigerian National Democratic Party. The stakes were also
high for the NPC, which faced political marginalization and the possible
reversal of its policies if the UPGA were to win. Therefore, the NPC
joined with the NNDP and a few fringe parties in the south to form the
Nigerian National Alliance (NNA), the main goal of which was the
prolongation of the status quo.
   The campaign season that led up to the December 30, 1964, elections
was abominable, particularly in the Northern and Western Regions,
where the NPC and NNDP respectively did everything in their power to
stymie the opposition. UPGA officials protested consistently that their
candidates were physically prevented from campaigning in the north.
Sometimes UPGA candidates were denied entry into towns where rallies
were planned. Often UPGA candidates and supporters were arbitrarily
detained or arrested, as in Kano in October 1964, when local police
arrested a reported 297 UPGA supporters. Refused recourse to lawyers
when brought before the local alkalai court, sixty-eight were released and
ordered to return to their home districts, while 134 were held for over six
months and ninety-five were imprisoned for terms ranging from six
months to a year.22 On October 17, Joseph Tarka, leader of the UMBC
and one of the highest-ranking UPGA members, was arrested on charges
of incitement, further hampering the UPGA campaign in the north.
   It was in the Western Region that the campaign was most competitive,
however. The AG had strong hopes of regaining control of regional
politics from Akintola, whose NNDP party was largely seen as a puppet
of the NPC and therefore a symbol of northern ‘‘domination.’’ Indeed,
Akintola’s party was quite unpopular, but it enjoyed one major advan-
tage: it controlled the regional government, the civil service, and the
electoral machinery. To an even greater extent than in the north, the
campaign in the west was characterized by violence and corruption as
the NNDP tried to quash the UPGA and its supporters. Thugs regularly
beat up UPGA supporters, destroyed UPGA property, and promoted a
general atmosphere of fear.
   The most common form of obstruction used against the UPGA in the
north and the west was the use of the state apparatus to prevent UPGA
candidates from competing as candidates. A main goal of the NNA was
to prevent UPGA candidates from being legally nominated to stand for
170                        A History of Nigeria
election. In this way, the NNA hoped to present as many of their own
candidates as possible unopposed. Since NNA supporters controlled the
election machinery in both the north and the west, they could easily
hamper the nomination process for UPGA candidates. When the time
came to turn in paperwork, election officials were often difficult to locate.
Once forms had been turned in, there was no way to guarantee that they
would be processed. In the end, eighty-eight out of 174 seats in the
Northern Region went unopposed to NNA candidates, while the NNDP
claimed nearly 30 percent of the seats in the Western Region uncontested.
The NCNC, which controlled the Eastern Region government, employed
similar tactics, returning 30 percent of its candidates unopposed as well.23
   Outraged by the intimidation and obstruction faced by UPGA can-
didates and supporters, NCNC officials called for an UPGA boycott of
the election. At the last minute, on December 29, the AG fell into line
with the NCNC and agreed to boycott, but it was too late to stop the
election from going forward. The boycott was a success only in the
Eastern Region. In the west, the NNDP made sure that voting went
forward, although election day was marred by allegations of voter
intimidation and violence at the polls. In the Mid-Western Region,
Premier Osadebay, who was an NCNC man, inexplicably ordered the
election to go ahead against the wishes of his party. The result was a
botched boycott that allowed the NNA to declare a sweeping victory, far
larger than it could have achieved had the UPGA contested whole-
heartedly.
   After the election, Prime Minister Balewa called upon President
Azikiwe to invite the creation of an NNA government, but Azikiwe, loyal
to the NCNC that he had helped to found, refused to do so. A consti-
tutional stalemate ensued, which was ended by negotiations between
Azikiwe and Balewa. The ‘‘Zik-Balewa Pact’’ that came out of these
negotiations gave the election to the NNA with a few conditions. First,
Balewa was required to form a ‘‘broad-based government’’ that incorpo-
rated UPGA members wherever possible. Second, the seats that had been
successfully boycotted in the election were to be recontested in March
1965. Finally, elections for the Western Region assembly were to go ahead
in October 1965. The UPGA won most of the seats in the ‘‘little election’’
that took place in March, the vast majority going to NCNC candidates in
the Eastern Region, but this was not enough to threaten the majority
claimed by the NNA. In the end, the NPC and NNDP combined
won 198 of the 312 seats in the federal assembly. Although this was a
clear victory, the conduct of the election had been disastrous, causing
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                171
resentment among UPGA supporters and causing many Nigerians to
question the fairness of the country’s democratic system.
    Nigerians’ faith in their system of government, already weakened by
the 1964 elections, was further strained by the Western Region elections
of October 1965. In style and substance, the Western Region elections
were little more than a repeat of the 1964 federal debacle. Fearing that it
would lose a fair election against the more popular AG candidates of the
UPGA, the NNDP again used force to intimidate UPGA supporters and
again prevented the UPGA from making nominations for many seats.
Other problems also plagued the alliance. An original agreement to split
the ninety-four seats between NCNC and AG candidates fell apart when
the AG decided to make a push for more seats. Therefore, in twenty
constituencies both an NCNC and an AG candidate ran, splitting the
UPGA vote. Fighting at some polling places also caused some polls to
close early. On top of these issues, however, was the general rigging of the
election by the NNDP. Reports on election day, October 11, 1965,
indicated cases of multiple voting and stuffing of ballot boxes in the
NNDP’s favor. Also, in a highly irregular move, Akintola decided that
the results of the elections were to be disseminated only from the central
headquarters in Ibadan and were not to be announced at local polling
places, as was normal practice, giving NNDP electoral officials the time
and secrecy to alter results as necessary. Without access to NNDP
archives, the extent to which the NNDP rigged the election may never be
known, but in such a zero-sum climate the NNDP preferred a concrete
victory over the illusion of a fair election.
    When the preliminary results were announced on October 13, both
sides declared victory. Officially, Akintola and the NNDP had claimed
fifty-one seats to the UPGA’s eleven, with thirty still to be decided. Chief
Adegbenro, the acting leader of the AG, immediately declared sixty-eight
victories for the UPGA, however, and announced that he was forming an
interim government. Adegbenro and other UPGA leaders were taken into
detention for disregarding the official results. Across the Western Region,
people took to the streets to protest the election results. Throughout
November and December the Western Region was a battle zone, as
UPGA supporters rioted, clashing with police, looting and burning the
homes of NNDP supporters, and even killing them in some cases. Fur-
ther fueling violence against the NNDP government was the govern-
ment’s ill-timed reduction in the price of cocoa. As the ruling party, the
NNDP controlled the marketing boards, which set the price for cocoa.
Usually, cocoa prices were set each year in late September or early
172                        A History of Nigeria
October; fearing the political repercussions of a price decrease in the days
before the election, however, NNDP officials had left the price artificially
high until after the election. Shortly after the election the price was
dropped from £120 per ton to just £65, a nearly 50 percent drop. Cocoa
farmers erupted in anger, creating a peasant revolt that joined with the
UPGA rioting to make the Western Region virtually ungovernable.24
   Rather than call a state of emergency in the Western Region, Prime
Minister Balewa instead decided to send forces for the sole purpose of
supporting his ally Akintola, but to little avail. The Western Region was
out of control, bitter over yet another failure of the First Republic to
provide democratic governance. Nowhere was this bitterness more
heartfelt than among Igbo military officers, who, tired of the inability of
the federal system to keep the peace and work in the best interests of all
Nigerians, now began plotting to overthrow the government.

                      military intervention
In the early hours of January 15, 1966, Nigeria’s first military coup
began. The coup was led by the ‘‘five majors,’’ as Kaduna Nzeogwu,
E. Ifeajuna, D. Okafor, C. I. Anuforo, and A. Ademoyega were later
dubbed, and operated out of each of the three regions of Nigeria and
Lagos. The leaders of the coup claimed that their goal was to bring an
end to the tribalism and corruption that had characterized the First
Republic. In the process, the majors arrested all the regional premiers,
and killed federal Prime Minister Tafawa Balewa, Premier S. L. Akintola
of the Western Region, and Premier Ahmadu Bello of the Northern
Region, who, the young military officers believed, were responsible for
the chaos of 1964 and 1965. Many northern military officers were also
killed in the coup. Despite the many high-profile murders carried out
by the five majors, the coup was not a complete success.25 In fact, it
remains unclear what, if any, plan the coup leaders had to govern the
country once the civilian leadership had been removed. Nevertheless,
with so many of the most powerful political figures in Nigeria dead or
imprisoned, the country was thrown into yet another major political
crisis.
   Power quickly devolved to the commanding officer of the Nigerian
army, Major General John Aguiyi-Ironsi, who immediately went about
restoring order. The main goals of the Ironsi regime, however, dovetailed
with those of the coup leaders: re-establishing law and order, maintaining
essential services, eradicating regionalism and tribalism, and ending
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                 173
corruption. Ironsi said his government would last only ‘‘until such a time
when a constitution is brought out according to the wishes of the
people.’’26 Ironsi outlawed political parties and placed military governors in
each of the regions. Included among these new military governors was the
new governor of the Eastern Region, Lieutenant Colonel Chukwuemeka
(‘‘Emeka’’) Odumegwu Ojukwu.
   Initially the military coup and the ascendancy of Ironsi were viewed
very positively, particularly in the south. To many southerners, the
removal of the civilian government marked the end of an agenda of
northern ‘‘domination.’’ In the Western Region, the collapse of the
unpopular NNDP regime was greeted with jubilation, and the rioting
and unrest that had plagued the region since the October elections came
to an almost immediate end. Ironsi’s subsequent policies as head of state
alarmed many northerners, however, who came to view the coup and
Ironsi as part of a plan by southern – specifically Igbo – officers to use
the military as a means of imposing a new era of Igbo domination. In
many ways, circumstantial evidence corroborated such a view. In the
first place, four of the five majors who led the January coup were Igbo.
Of all the officers and politicians killed in the coup, only one had been
Igbo, while the majority had been northerners. While the two most
prominent figures in northern politics – Balewa and Bello – had been
murdered along with their ally Akintola, the Igbo premiers of the Mid-
Western and Eastern Regions had been arrested but later released. To
many, this pattern indicated that the coup was primarily an Igbo strike
against the north.
   Making matters worse, Ironsi made several moves in the first half of
1966 that led many northerners to believe that he was part of an Igbo
conspiracy. Ironsi was himself an Igbo, and, in an unwise political move,
he tended to surround himself with Igbo advisers throughout his time in
power. He allowed the coup plotters to remain in detention, rather than
bringing them to trial for the crimes that northerners believed they had
committed. He has also been accused of accelerating the promotion of
Igbo officers in the military, counter to the dictates of the quota system.
The most damning evidence against Ironsi in the eyes of northerners,
however, came in the form of Decree no. 34 of May 24, 1966, in which he
officially abolished the federal system and replaced it with a unitary
system. The regional structure of Nigeria ceased to exist, and was replaced
by ‘‘groups of provinces.’’ Both the military and the civil service, which
had previously been administered regionally, were to be integrated and
administered from the center.
174                          A History of Nigeria
   To northerners this was Igbo domination in practice. The north now
faced the prospect of being occupied by southern military officers, of
being administered by southern civil servants. Furthermore, northerners
now lacked the safeguards placed in the federal system that made sure that
northerners were involved in governance to an extent commensurate with
their population. Not willing to let their position slip any further, on July 29,
1966, a group of northern NCOs and officers carried out a countercoup,
capturing and killing Ironsi in Ibadan. For three days the country teetered
without a head of state, until the leading northern officers selected thirty-
one-year-old Lieutenant Colonel. Yakubu (‘‘Jack’’) Gowon as supreme
commander of the armed forces and the new head of state.
   Gowon immediately announced the repeal of Decree no. 34, indicating
that Nigeria was committed to unity within a federal structure with
respect for regional differences. Gowon was to find reconciliation diffi-
cult, however, particularly with Lieutenant Colonel Ojukwu, the Igbo
military governor of the Eastern Region, who had many grave reserva-
tions about the legitimacy of the countercoup. In the first place, Ojukwu
did not believe that Gowon had the authority to become supreme
commander of the armed forces. Several still living officers had higher
rank and more experience than Gowon, and Ojukwu argued that any of
these officers had a greater claim to the title of supreme commander than
the usurper Gowon. A far more pressing issue, however, was the safety of
Igbos in Nigeria and the ability or willingness of the military government
to protect them. Between May, when Ironsi had abolished the federal
structure, and September 1966 continuous violence had been directed at
Igbos and other easterners living in the north. A spate of massacres, many
conducted by northern soldiers, took the lives of between 80,000 and
100,000 easterners during this period, the worst occurring in September.
These massacres sparked revenge killings of northerners resident in the
Eastern Region. Such events led Ojukwu to question whether Igbos could
ever live in harmony within a federal Nigeria. He urged all easterners
outside the region to return home and suggested that all northerners in
the east do likewise. This led to large population movements in the latter
half of 1966 and the early part of 1967.
   While Ojukwu was already pondering the possibility of secession on the
grounds that easterners were no longer safe within Nigeria, Gowon was
determined to keep the east within the federation. A series of meetings
between Gowon and Ojukwu took place in Aburi, Ghana, on January 4–5,
1967. These negotiations produced only a vague and loosely worded
resolution. Gowon believed that the federation had been preserved at
                   Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970               175
Aburi, while Ojukwu claimed the Aburi agreement gave him wide-ranging
powers to control the government of the Eastern Region and even to secede
from the federation if he so chose. In March Ojukwu announced that as of
April 1 the government of the Eastern Region would take over all federal
departments, taxes, and other revenues, essentially making the region
independently administered. Gowon responded by blockading the coast
and instituting economic sanctions against the east. Last-ditch efforts at a
peaceful settlement broke down, and, on May 30, Ojukwu declared the
independence of the Eastern Region, which he renamed the Independent
Republic of Biafra.

                               civil war
From the perspective of Gowon and the Federal Military Government,
Biafra could not simply be allowed to secede, for three main reasons.
First, many in the FMG, including Gowon, sincerely believed in the
practicability of Nigerian unity and were willing to fight to preserve it.
Second, to allow the secession of Biafra would be to invite the secession of
any minority group within the federation at any time. The prospect of
Nigeria fragmenting into many small, hostile states was not appetizing to
the FMG. Finally, the lands claimed by Biafra contained 67 percent
of the known petroleum reserves in Nigeria. The secession of Biafra thus
threatened what had the potential to be a very lucrative revenue base
for the FMG.
   Civil war ensued. Sometimes called the Biafran war, but most com-
monly referred to as the Nigerian Civil War, the fighting that took place
between the FMG and the forces of Biafra lasted for two and a half years,
ending in Biafra’s collapse and surrender on January 12, 1970.27 The
FMG initially considered the war a ‘‘police action’’ that would not take
long to settle; the Biafrans considered it a war for their very survival,
however. Biafrans claimed throughout the war that the ultimate goal of
the federal government was the ‘‘genocide’’ of the Igbo people. By pre-
senting the war as first and foremost a self-defense effort, Ojukwu and his
cohort of advisers were able to galvanize public opinion within Biafra
around a growing sense of Igbo nationalism, while also engendering a
great deal of sympathy in the international arena.
   In some ways, the actions of the FMG to preserve the Nigerian fed-
eration seemed to support Biafra’s interpretation that the main goal of the
FMG was the eradication of the Igbo. Gowon’s war strategy focused on
the isolation of Igbo territory and the impoverishment of Biafra.
176                        A History of Nigeria
Immediately after Ojukwu declared the independence of Biafra, Gowon
declared a state of emergency in Nigeria and announced the creation of
new states. The three regions and the Federal Capital Territory of Lagos
were carved up into twelve new states, three of which were created in the
former Eastern Region. In this way, Gowon appeased minority groups
across the country that had been clamoring for new states since before
independence. Only one of the three states created out of the Eastern
Region, the East Central State, was predominantly Igbo. Moreover, the
East Central State was landlocked while the other two states in the
Eastern Region, Rivers and South-eastern, accounted for the entire
coastline of Biafra and contained most of the oil wealth of the country.
The creation of these states within Biafra was largely symbolic – Biafra
controlled the entire territory of the former Eastern Region at the time –
but it did weaken support for the Biafran government among non-Igbo
citizens, who viewed the creation of the states as an indication of the
FMG’s ability to act in their interests.
   While the creation of new states was designed to isolate the Igbo and
make political matters more difficult for the Biafran government, Gowon
undertook measures to dampen the Biafran economy as well. The
blockade of the coast continued, and a military cordon surrounding the
country made it difficult for Biafra to ship food and other items into or
out of the country. Although the FMG did allow regular shipments of
relief goods carried by humanitarian organizations, the overall effect of
the embargo was detrimental. In January 1968 Gowon announced that
the Nigerian currency would be changed. This meant that any Nigerian
currency that the Biafrans had amassed to fund the war and their gov-
ernment quickly became worthless. Over time, these economic factors
took their toll on Biafra. Food became increasingly scarce and high
inflation made even existing goods prohibitively expensive within Biafra.
For example, the price of beef rose from 3 shillings a pound to 60, dried
fish from 5 shillings a pound to 60, and a chicken, which went for roughly
15 shillings before the war, cost as much as £30 by its end.28
   After some initial military successes achieved by the Biafran army,
which actually occupied the Mid-Western Region in the first months of
the war and threatened an invasion of the Western Region, FMG forces
began to make advances, slowly pushing the Biafrans back deep into their
own territory. Federal troops quickly pushed the Biafran army out of the
Mid-Western region, occupied Enugu, Biafra’s first capital, on October 4,
1967, and had taken Calabar by October 18. It seemed as if the war would
end with a swift federal victory. The Biafran Igbos refused to surrender so
                    Instability and civil war, 1960 – 1970                  177




          Figure 7.1 A motor park in Umuahia (collection of Roy Doron)


easily, however. The capital was moved south to Umuahia, and the
fighting slackened for some time. Part of the reason for this was Gowon’s
hope that his policies of economic strangulation and the political pro-
pitiation of minority groups would cause those within Biafra to rise up
against the Biafran government on their own.29
   This proved to be a mistake. Malnourishment and starvation increased
rapidly within Biafra, allowing Ojukwu and other Biafran leaders to exploit
Gowon’s policies as proof of a genocidal conspiracy against the Igbo. Biafra
produced massive amounts of propaganda within the country and even
hired the European advertising firm H. Wm. Bernhardt Inc., which
published under the imprint Markpress, to promote the Biafran cause –
particularly the allegations of ‘‘genocide’’ – to the international commu-
nity. Deprivation was indeed a tool of the FMG’s strategy; Gowon decried
accusations of genocide, however, repeatedly noting the millions of Igbo
currently living safely in territories occupied by federal forces. Nevertheless,
the propaganda produced by Biafra helped to galvanize feeling against the
FMG among Biafran Igbos and earned sympathy for Biafra from many
international sources.
178                        A History of Nigeria
   International involvement in the Nigerian Civil War undoubtedly
helped to prolong the conflict. Initially, Biafra had difficulty finding
sympathetic ears. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) refused to
recognize Biafra and treated the war as an internal Nigerian conflict. The
United Kingdom and the United States chose to sit on the fence, pre-
ferring to withhold support for either side until it was evident who was
going to win. The unwillingness of the United States and the United
Kingdom to support the federal cause wholeheartedly angered the FMG,
which turned to the USSR for support. The Soviets were more than
willing to oblige, and became the chief supplier of aircraft and advisers to
the FMG over the course of the war. Things began to change in Biafra’s
favor in 1968, however. Several member states of the OAU – Tanzania,
Gabon, the Ivory Coast, and Zambia – broke ranks and formally
recognized Biafra. Influenced by the international reports of ‘‘genocide,’’
several European and Asian countries also expressed solidarity with
Biafra, although never officially recognizing it as an independent country.
France and Portugal in particular provided Biafra with supplies and
logistical support, while Israel saw Biafra, like Israel itself, as a state
surrounded by enemies intent on its destruction. China, seeing a chance
to challenge the USSR for leadership of the communist world, also
expressed its sympathy for Biafra, although very little tangible support
followed.30
   International non-governmental actors also played a role in the war.
The Catholic Church, to which many Biafrans belonged, worked hand in
hand with the International Red Cross to provide humanitarian aid to
Biafrans, flying nightly shipments of food, medicine, and other non-
military supplies into Biafra’s famous airstrip at Uli. Both Biafra and the
FMG also employed mercenaries, particularly as fighter pilots, during the
war. The ability of international actors to move supplies into Biafra across
the blockade allowed the embattled state to survive for much longer than
it would otherwise have done.
   With the aid of international organizations and governments, and
buoyed by an ideology of self-preservation, Biafran Igbos held out as
long as possible against the stronger FMG. Eventually, however, the
Biafran state collapsed, overrun by federal troops in December 1969 and
January 1970. Seeing the writing on the wall, Ojukwu fled to the Ivory
Coast, claiming that as long as he lived the revolution was not dead.
On January 12, 1970, Major General Phillip Effiong, to whom Ojukwu
had ceded power before his flight, officially surrendered to Gowon
in Lagos.
Figure 7.2 A neighborhood in present-day Kano (collection of Jonathan T. Reynolds)
180                        A History of Nigeria

                        legacies of the war
The war had taken the lives of between 1 and 3 million Nigerians, mostly
in the Eastern Region and many through starvation, leaving perhaps
another 3 million displaced, but the ‘‘genocide’’ that Igbos so feared did
not materialize after the war. Gowon stressed that there was to be no
vengeance and no reparations, and that there had been no winners or
losers in the ‘‘war of brothers.’’ The process of reintegration and recon-
ciliation began immediately, buoyed by a rapid and enormous growth in
petroleum production in the 1970s.
   The civil war did leave a significant legacy to Nigeria, despite the rapid
reintegration of the country and concerted efforts on the part of Nigerians
to put the past behind them. The national question would continue to
plague Nigerian political rhetoric. On the political level, however, these
tensions were overshadowed by the fact that the military remained in
power after the war. Committed to unity and order, the military govern-
ment was by no means democratic. In fact, the military learned that it
could ignore the public almost completely in the years after the civil war,
becoming every bit the corrupt, bloated bureaucracy that the First Republic
had been. The military government was not as fragile as the First Republic,
however, despite its increasing corruption and ineffectiveness. If anything,
the military emerged from the civil war more powerful and dominant than
it had been previously. At the time of the January 1966 coup the Nigerian
military was made up of roughly 10,000 soldiers. By the end of the war it
had ballooned to over 270,000 soldiers. Cognizant of the need to keep
people employed and also aware that its own power lay in its ability to exert
force where necessary, the military regime retained large armed forces in the
years after the war. As a percentage of the total budget, military spending
jumped from 0.2 percent in 1961 to 6 percent in 1970. By the end of the
war the military had become the driving force of Nigerian government and
politics.
